<!-- Source: https://vasp.at/wiki/index.php/Calculating_the_hyperfine-coupling_constant | revid: 30854 | retrieved: 2026-06-24 -->
<!-- © VASP wiki contributors. Licensed under GNU Free Documentation License 1.2 (GFDL 1.2). -->

# Calculating the hyperfine-coupling constant


The hyperfine coupling constant (cf. hyperfine splitting) describes the
interaction between the nuclear magnetic dipole moment and the magnetic
field generated by the electrons (i.e., the nuclear spin-electron spin
coupling). The hyperfine coupling constant is calculated using
[LHYPERFINE](../incar-tags/LHYPERFINE.md)
<sup>[\[1\]](#cite_note-szasz:prb:2013-1)</sup>.
The hyperfine splitting often includes the interaction between the
nuclear quadrupole moment and the electric field gradient (EFG), which
is calculated separately using [LEFG](../incar-tags/LEFG.md) and the
description in
<a href="/wiki/NMR#Quadrupolar_nuclei_-_electric_field_gradient"
class="mw-redirect" title="NMR">performing an EFG calculation</a>. The
hyperfine splitting can be measured using electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR), also called electron-spin resonance (ESR), and in
atomic spectroscopy. The theory is covered in the [NMR category
page](../categories/Category-NMR.md) and
[LHYPERFINE](../incar-tags/LHYPERFINE.md) page.


## Contents


- [1 Step-by-step
  instructions](#step-by-step-instructions)
- [2
  Recommendations and
  advice](#recommendations-and-advice)
  - [2.1
    Structure](#structure)
  - [2.2 Hybrid
    functionals](#hybrid-functionals)
  - [2.3 PAW
    pseudopotential](#paw-pseudopotential)
  - [2.4 Additional
    tags](#additional-tags)
- [3 Example
  scripts for convergence
  tests](#example-scripts-for-convergence-tests)
  - [3.1 Energetic
    break criterion tests](#energetic-break-criterion-tests)
  - [3.2
    **k**-points tests](#k-points-tests)
  - [3.3 Energy
    cutoff tests](#energy-cutoff-tests)
- [4 Related tags
  and articles](#related-tags-and-articles)
- [5
  References](#references)


## Step-by-step instructions\[<a
href="/wiki/index.php?title=Calculating_the_hyperfine-coupling_constant&amp;veaction=edit&amp;section=1"
class="mw-editsection-visualeditor"
title="Edit section: Step-by-step instructions">edit</a> \| (./index.php.md)\]

The hyperfine constant is calculated post-self-consistent field
(post-SCF) using [LHYPERFINE](../incar-tags/LHYPERFINE.md). A
well-converged SCF calculation is therefore crucial. The hyperfine
coupling constant is sensitive to several input parameters that must all
be tested.

**Step 1 (optional):** Calculate the hyperfine constant using a
previously converged calculation

Since the hyperfine constant is calculated post-SCF, you can use a
previously converged [WAVECAR](../input-files/WAVECAR.md) with
[ISTART](../incar-tags/ISTART.md) = 1 and [NELM](../incar-tags/NELM.md) = 1.
The corresponding density, [CHGCAR](../input-files/CHGCAR.md) is calculated
from the [WAVECAR](../input-files/WAVECAR.md) file before the first
elementary step so need not be provided.

**Step 2a:** Define the nuclear gyromagnetic ratios

The hyperfine coupling constant depends on the nuclear gyromagnetic
ratios defined in [NGYROMAG](../incar-tags/NGYROMAG.md). Since the
defaults are set to 1, the gyromagnetic ratios must be defined to obtain
meaningful coupling constants. Each species in your
[POSCAR](../input-files/POSCAR.md) file should be defined; there is no need
to define each individual ion. A short table of values can be found in
Ref.
<sup>[\[2\]](#cite_note-gyromag:web-2)</sup>.
For a more complete list, see the [NGYROMAG](../incar-tags/NGYROMAG.md)
tag documentation.

**Step 2b (optional):** Determine a suitable energetic break value

The break condition for the self-consistency step
[EDIFF](../incar-tags/EDIFF.md) does not strongly influence the coupling
parameter for our test systems. However, it is important to confirm this
for your system before performing more expensive convergence tests.

The hyperfine coupling constant depends on the nuclear gyromagnetic
ratios defined in [NGYROMAG](../incar-tags/NGYROMAG.md). Since the
defaults are set to 1, the gyromagnetic ratios must be defined to obtain
meaningful coupling constants. Each species in your
[POSCAR](../input-files/POSCAR.md) file should be defined; there is no need
to define each individual ion.

Use the converged energetic break condition for all subsequent
convergence tests.

**Step 3:** Converge the plane-wave basis

The plane-wave basis can strongly influence the coupling constant.
Unconverged values should not be compared to experiment. Perform
multiple calculations while increasing the basis set size, as defined in
[ENCUT](../incar-tags/ENCUT.md), incrementally (e.g., by 100 eV intervals).
Convergence should be aimed to be within 0.1 MHz, although this will not
be feasible for heavier elements.

Use the converged plane-wave energy cut-off for all subsequent
convergence tests.

**Step 4:** Converge the **k** point mesh

Similar to the basis, the **k** point mesh can strongly influence the
coupling constant. The **k** point mesh should be increased
incrementally, i.e., 1x1x1, 2x2x2, 3x3x3, until convergence to within
0.1 MHz is achieved.

Use the converged **k-**-point mesh for all subsequent calculations.

**Step 5:** Compare to experiment

The purpose of these calculations is to compare to experiment. An
example is given in Ref.
<sup>[\[1\]](#cite_note-szasz:prb:2013-1)</sup>.
It is important to include core contributions
<sup>[\[3\]](#cite_note-yazyev:prb:2005-3)</sup>,
as these can account for a significant portion of the Fermi contact
term. The total coupling parameter can be compared to EPR.

**Step 6 (optional):** Perform hybrid calculations

In the literature, HSE06 has been shown to better localize defect
states, which improves comparison to experiment relative to PBE
<sup>[\[1\]](#cite_note-szasz:prb:2013-1)</sup>.
Consider performing a hybrid calculation, if it is affordable. You will
need to repeat the convergence tests described in Steps 2-4.

|  |
|----|
| **Mind:** Significant time savings can be achieved for hybrid functionals by starting from a [WAVECAR](../input-files/WAVECAR.md) from a GGA calculation. |

## Recommendations and advice\[<a
href="/wiki/index.php?title=Calculating_the_hyperfine-coupling_constant&amp;veaction=edit&amp;section=2"
class="mw-editsection-visualeditor"
title="Edit section: Recommendations and advice">edit</a> \| (./index.php.md)\]

The hyperfine coupling constant requires tightly converged settings. The
energetic break condition [EDIFF](../incar-tags/EDIFF.md) and the
plane-wave energy cutoff [ENCUT](../incar-tags/ENCUT.md) impact the
convergence of the hyperfine coupling constant. For solid-state systems,
the choice of k-point mesh [KPOINTS](../input-files/KPOINTS.md) used can
also be very important. Besides these input settings, the hyperfine
coupling constant is influenced by several other factors, specifically
structure, [POTCAR](../input-files/POTCAR.md), and method.

### Structure\[<a
href="/wiki/index.php?title=Calculating_the_hyperfine-coupling_constant&amp;veaction=edit&amp;section=3"
class="mw-editsection-visualeditor"
title="Edit section: Structure">edit</a> \| (./index.php.md)\]

The structure defined in [POSCAR](../input-files/POSCAR.md) will impact the
hyperfine constant in two ways. The first and most important is that
cells that are too small may converge to non-magnetic systems. For
example, the NV-diamond defect cannot be properly described by a 15-atom
supercell (based on a 2x2x2 cell from primitive diamond). As you
increase the **k**-point mesh, the magnetization disappears due to
coupling between neighboring defect sites (i.e., increasing the k-point
mesh causes the coupling to disappear (all zeros)). Be careful to use a
large enough cell for your calculation, otherwise even converged
settings will produce meaningless outputs. Sometimes, a non-magnetic
solution is incorrectly found. If you are certain that it should be
[magnetic](../categories/Category-Magnetism.md), then you can
force this by using [NUPDOWN](../incar-tags/NUPDOWN.md) to fix the number
of unpaired electrons in your system during the calculation. Ensure that
the energy of the magnetic state is lower than the non-magnetic state.

A second structural problem will come from the precise
[POSCAR](../input-files/POSCAR.md) that you use. Slightly different lattice
parameters (10 mÅ) can change the hyperfine coupling constant by ~0.5
MHz. Make sure to use a [well-optimized
structure](Structure_optimization.md).

### Hybrid functionals\[<a
href="/wiki/index.php?title=Calculating_the_hyperfine-coupling_constant&amp;veaction=edit&amp;section=4"
class="mw-editsection-visualeditor"
title="Edit section: Hybrid functionals">edit</a> \| (./index.php.md)\]

The calculated hyperfine coupling parameter is strongly influenced by
the chosen method. PBE tends to underestimate the coupling constant
relative to experiment. HSE06 and other [hybrid
functionals](../methods/Category-Hybrid_functionals.md)
improve this, matching well with experiment
<sup>[\[1\]](#cite_note-szasz:prb:2013-1)</sup>.
Hybrid functional localize defect states, resulting in an improved
description over GGA functionals. The [INCAR](../input-files/INCAR.md) tags
are specified [in hybrid
functionals](../methods/List_of_hybrid_functionals.md)
and no additional tags are required. We found that the improvement for
hybrid functionals is seen for both range-separated and unscreened
hybrid functionals.

### PAW pseudopotential\[<a
href="/wiki/index.php?title=Calculating_the_hyperfine-coupling_constant&amp;veaction=edit&amp;section=5"
class="mw-editsection-visualeditor"
title="Edit section: PAW pseudopotential">edit</a> \| (./index.php.md)\]

The choice of [PAW
pseudopotential](../categories/Category-Pseudopotentials.md)
can be important. [GW
pseudopotentials](../input-files/Available_pseudopotentials.md)
(i.e. *\*\_GW*) make a difference of a few ppm to the chemical
shielding.

It is expected that using GW pseudopotentials will improve the
description of the hyperfine coupling parameter for heavier elements,
though it has not been tested. Additionally, for heavier elements, it is
expected that using additional valence electrons (i.e., *\*\_sv*,
*\*\_pv*) will improve calculating the hyperfine coupling constant.

### Additional tags\[<a
href="/wiki/index.php?title=Calculating_the_hyperfine-coupling_constant&amp;veaction=edit&amp;section=6"
class="mw-editsection-visualeditor"
title="Edit section: Additional tags">edit</a> \| (./index.php.md)\]

There are a few additional [INCAR](../input-files/INCAR.md) tags that should
be used to ensure tight convergence, specifically, the precision should
be set to
[`PREC`](../incar-tags/PREC.md)` = Accurate`,
rather than `Normal`. We also recommend [EDIFF](../incar-tags/EDIFF.md) to
a minimum of `1E-6` eV to ensure well-converged
[WAVECAR](../input-files/WAVECAR.md).

[LASPH](../incar-tags/LASPH.md) = .TRUE. includes the non-spherical
contributions to the gradient of the density in PAW spheres. For
symmetric systems, the difference is small, a few ppm. For asymmetric
systems, the difference is much larger, on the order of 10 ppm.
Therefore, the non-spherical contributions must be included. However,
using [LASPH](../incar-tags/LASPH.md) = .TRUE. decreases the calculated
hyperfine coupling constant, weakening agreement with experiment,
including in the literature where it was not previously used
<sup>[\[1\]](#cite_note-szasz:prb:2013-1)</sup>.

## Example scripts for convergence tests\[<a
href="/wiki/index.php?title=Calculating_the_hyperfine-coupling_constant&amp;veaction=edit&amp;section=7"
class="mw-editsection-visualeditor"
title="Edit section: Example scripts for convergence tests">edit</a> \| (./index.php.md)\]

Several tests are necessary to obtain converged coupling parameters. We
provide some example scripts below:

|  |
|----|
| **Important:** Change the values of [NGYROMAG](../incar-tags/NGYROMAG.md) to your corresponding system. |

### Energetic break criterion tests\[<a
href="/wiki/index.php?title=Calculating_the_hyperfine-coupling_constant&amp;veaction=edit&amp;section=8"
class="mw-editsection-visualeditor"
title="Edit section: Energetic break criterion tests">edit</a> \| (./index.php.md)\]

For converging the energetic break criterion for a single ionic step
([EDIFF](../incar-tags/EDIFF.md)), start with the 1E-4 and then increase by
orders of magnitude:

Energetic break criterion: **INCAR.hyperfine**

    PREC = Accurate  
    ENCUT = 400         
    EDIFF = 1E-6  
    ISMEAR = 0; SIGMA = 0.01 
    LHYPERFINE = .TRUE.
    NGYROMAG = 10.7084 3.077
    LASPH = .TRUE.
    ISPIN = 2

Script to loop through [EDIFF](../incar-tags/EDIFF.md) from 1E-4 eV to 1E-8
eV:

    rm -f hyperfine.dat
    for a in 4 5 6 7 8
    do
    cp INCAR.hyperfine INCAR
    sed -i "s/1E-4/1E-$a/g" INCAR

    mpirun -np 4 $PATH_TO_EXECUTABLE/vasp_std

    cp OUTCAR OUTCAR.$a
    done

### **k**-points tests\[<a
href="/wiki/index.php?title=Calculating_the_hyperfine-coupling_constant&amp;veaction=edit&amp;section=9"
class="mw-editsection-visualeditor"
title="Edit section: k-points tests">edit</a> | (./index.php.md)\]

For converging **k** points, start with the Γ-point and increase the
**k**-point mesh incrementally:

Initial Γ-only mesh: **KPOINTS.hyperfine**

    C
    0
    G
     1 1 1
     0 0 0

Script to go through **k**-point meshes from Γ-only to 8x8x8:

    rm -f hyperfine.dat
    for a in 1 2 4 6 8
    do
    cp KPOINTS.hyperfine KPOINTS
    sed -i "s/1 1 1/$a $a $a/g" KPOINTS

    mpirun -np 4 $PATH_TO_EXECUTABLE/vasp_std

    cp OUTCAR OUTCAR.$a
    done

### Energy cutoff tests\[<a
href="/wiki/index.php?title=Calculating_the_hyperfine-coupling_constant&amp;veaction=edit&amp;section=10"
class="mw-editsection-visualeditor"
title="Edit section: Energy cutoff tests">edit</a> \| (./index.php.md)\]

For converging the energy cutoff, start from at least the value of ENMAX
given in the [POTCAR](../input-files/POTCAR.md) file and then increase
incrementally in steps of 100 eV:

Initial
[INCAR](../input-files/INCAR.md):
**INCAR.hyperfine**

    PREC = Accurate  
    ENCUT = 400         
    EDIFF = 1E-6  
    ISMEAR = 0; SIGMA = 0.01 
    LHYPERFINE = .TRUE.
    NGYROMAG = 10.7084 3.077
    LASPH = .TRUE.
    ISPIN = 2

Script to loop through [ENCUT](../incar-tags/ENCUT.md) from 400 eV to 600
eV:

    rm -f hyperfine.dat
    for a in 400 500 600
    do
    cp INCAR.hyperfine INCAR
    sed -i "s/400/$a/g" INCAR

    mpirun -np 4 $PATH_TO_EXECUTABLE/vasp_std

    cp OUTCAR OUTCAR.$a
    done

## Related tags and articles\[<a
href="/wiki/index.php?title=Calculating_the_hyperfine-coupling_constant&amp;veaction=edit&amp;section=11"
class="mw-editsection-visualeditor"
title="Edit section: Related tags and articles">edit</a> \| (./index.php.md)\]

[LHYPERFINE](../incar-tags/LHYPERFINE.md),
[NGYROMAG](../incar-tags/NGYROMAG.md)

## References\[<a
href="/wiki/index.php?title=Calculating_the_hyperfine-coupling_constant&amp;veaction=edit&amp;section=12"
class="mw-editsection-visualeditor"
title="Edit section: References">edit</a> \| (./index.php.md)\]


1.  ↑
    <sup>[a](#cite_ref-szasz:prb:2013_1-0)</sup>
    <sup>[b](#cite_ref-szasz:prb:2013_1-1)</sup>
    <sup>[c](#cite_ref-szasz:prb:2013_1-2)</sup>
    <sup>[d](#cite_ref-szasz:prb:2013_1-3)</sup>
    <sup>[e](#cite_ref-szasz:prb:2013_1-4)</sup>
    <a href="https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.88.075202"
    class="external text" rel="nofollow">K. Szasz, T. Hornos, M. Marsman,
    and A. Gali, <em>Hyperfine coupling of point defects in semiconductors
    by hybrid density functional calculations: The role of core spin
    polarization</em>, Phys. Rev. B, <strong>88</strong>, 075202 (2013).</a>
2.  [↑](#cite_ref-gyromag:web_2-0)
    <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gyromagnetic_ratio#For_a_nucleus"
    class="external text" rel="nofollow">Gyromagnetic ratio,
    www.wikipedia.org (2025)</a>
3.  [↑](#cite_ref-yazyev:prb:2005_3-0)
    <a href="https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.71.115110"
    class="external text" rel="nofollow">O. V. Yazyev, I. Tavernelli, L.
    Helm, and U. R. Roethlisberger, <em>Core spin-polarization correction in
    pseudopotential-based electronic structure calculations</em>, Phys. Rev.
    B <strong>71</strong>, 115110 (2006).</a>


