<!-- Source: https://vasp.at/wiki/index.php/Basis_set_convergence_of_RPA-ACFDT_calculations | revid: 13309 | retrieved: 2026-06-24 -->
<!-- © VASP wiki contributors. Licensed under GNU Free Documentation License 1.2 (GFDL 1.2). -->

# Basis set convergence of RPA-ACFDT calculations


The expression for the ACFDT-RPA correlation energy written in terms of
reciprocal lattice vectors reads:

$E_{\rm c}^{\rm RPA}=\int_{0}^{\infty} \frac{\mathrm{d}\omega}{2\pi}
\sum_{{\mathbf{q}}\in \mathbf{BZ} }\sum_{{\mathbf{G}}}
\left\\(\mathrm{ln}\[1-\tilde\chi^0({\mathbf{q}},\mathrm{i}\omega)V({\mathbf{q}})\])_{{\mathbf{G,G}}}
+V_{{\mathbf{G,G}}}({\mathbf{q}})\tilde\chi^0({\mathbf{q}},{\mathrm{i}}\omega)
\right\\$.

The sum over reciprocal lattice vectors has to be truncated at some
$\mathbf{G}_{\mathrm{max}}$, determined by
$\frac{\hbar^2|{\mathbf{G}}+{\mathbf{q}}|^2}{2\mathrm{m}_e}$ \< [ENCUTGW](../incar-tags/ENCUTGW.md), which can be
set in the [INCAR](../input-files/INCAR.md) file. The default value is
$\frac{2}{3}\times$ [ENCUT](../incar-tags/ENCUT.md), which
experience has taught us not to change. For systematic convergence
tests, instead increase [ENCUT](../incar-tags/ENCUT.md) and repeat steps 1
to 4, but be aware that the "maximum number of plane-waves" changes when
[ENCUT](../incar-tags/ENCUT.md) is increased. Note that it is virtually
impossible, to converge absolute correlation energies. Rather
concentrate on relative energies (e.g. energy differences between two
solids, or between a solid and the constituent atoms).

Since correlation energies converge very slowly with respect to
$\mathbf{G}_{\rm max }$, VASP automatically
extrapolates to the infinite basis set limit using a linear regression
to the equation:
<sup>[\[1\]](#cite_note-harl:2008-1)[\[2\]](#cite_note-harl:2010-2)[\[3\]](#cite_note-klimes:2014-3)</sup>

$E_{\mathrm{c}}({\mathbf{G}})=E_{\mathrm{c}}(\infty)+\frac{A}{{\mathbf{G}}^3}$.

Furthermore, the Coulomb kernel is smoothly truncated between
[ENCUTGWSOFT](../incar-tags/ENCUTGWSOFT.md) and
[ENCUTGW](../incar-tags/ENCUTGW.md) using a simple cosine like window
function (Hann window function). Alternatively, the basis set
extrapolation can be performed by setting
[LSCK](../incar-tags/LSCK.md)=.TRUE., using the squeezed Coulomb kernel
method.<sup>[\[4\]](#cite_note-riemelmoser:jcp:2020-4)</sup>

The default for [ENCUTGWSOFT](../incar-tags/ENCUTGWSOFT.md) is
0.8$\times$[ENCUTGW](../incar-tags/ENCUTGW.md) (again we do
not recommend to change this default).

The integral over $\omega$ is
evaluated by means of a highly accurate minimax
integration.<sup>[\[5\]](#cite_note-kaltak:2014-5)</sup>
The number of $\omega$
points is determined by the flag [NOMEGA](../incar-tags/NOMEGA.md),
whereas the energy range of transitions is determined by the band gap
and the energy difference between the lowest occupied and highest
unoccupied one-electron orbital. VASP determines these values
automatically (from vasp.5.4.1 on), and the user should only carefully
converge with respect to the number of frequency points
[NOMEGA](../incar-tags/NOMEGA.md). A good choice is usually
[NOMEGA](../incar-tags/NOMEGA.md)=12, however, for large gap systems one
might obtain $\mu$eV
convergence per atom already using 8 points, whereas for metals up to
[NOMEGA](../incar-tags/NOMEGA.md)=24 frequency points are sometimes
necessary, in particular, for large unit cells.

Strictly adhere to the steps outlines above. Specifically, be aware that
steps two and three require the [WAVECAR](../input-files/WAVECAR.md) file
generated in step one, whereas step four requires the
[WAVECAR](../input-files/WAVECAR.md) and
[WAVEDER](../input-files/WAVEDER.md) file generated in step three
(generated by setting [LOPTICS](../incar-tags/LOPTICS.md)=*.TRUE.*).

## References\[<a
href="/wiki/index.php?title=Basis_set_convergence_of_RPA-ACFDT_calculations&amp;veaction=edit&amp;section=1"
class="mw-editsection-visualeditor"
title="Edit section: References">edit</a> \| (./index.php.md)\]


1.  [↑](#cite_ref-harl:2008_1-0)
    <a href="https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.81.115126"
    class="external text" rel="nofollow">J. Harl and G. Kresse, Phys. Rev. B
    <strong>77</strong>, 045136 (2008).</a>
2.  [↑](#cite_ref-harl:2010_2-0)
    <a href="https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.81.115126"
    class="external text" rel="nofollow">J. Harl, L. Schimka, and G. Kresse,
    Phys. Rev. B <strong>81</strong>, 115126 (2010).</a>
3.  [↑](#cite_ref-klimes:2014_3-0)
    <a href="https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.90.075125"
    class="external text" rel="nofollow">J. Klimeš, M. Kaltak, and G.
    Kresse, Phys. Rev. B <strong>90</strong>, 075125 (2014).</a>
4.  [↑](#cite_ref-riemelmoser:jcp:2020_4-0)
    <a href="https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0002246" class="external text"
    rel="nofollow">S. Riemelmoser, M. Kaltak, and G. Kresse, J. Chem. Phys.
    <strong>152(13)</strong>, 134103 (2020).</a>
5.  [↑](#cite_ref-kaltak:2014_5-0)
    <a href="https://doi.org/10.1021/ct5001268" class="external text"
    rel="nofollow">M. Kaltak, J. Klimeš, and G. Kresse, J. Chem. Theory
    Comput. <strong>10</strong>, 2498-2507 (2014).</a>


